<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 67 Issue 187 (Thursday, September 26, 2002)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 67, Number 187 (Thursday, September 26, 2002)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 60558-60561]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 02-24416]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Federal Aviation Administration

14 CFR Part 39

[Docket No. 2002-NM-235-AD; Amendment 39-12894; AD 2002-19-14]
RIN 2120-AA64


Airworthiness Directives; Lockheed C-130A Airplanes, Type 
Certificated in the Restricted Category

AGENCY: Federal Aviation Administration, DOT.

ACTION: Final rule; request for comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD) that 
is applicable to all Lockheed C-130A airplanes, type certificated in 
the restricted category. This action requires repetitive inspections to 
detect cracks at

[[Page 60559]]

fastener holes in the left- and right-side lower skin panels and 
stringers of the center wing between wing stations 41.0 and 71.0; and 
replacement of any cracked part with a new part, or repair and 
inspections at new intervals. This action is necessary to detect and 
correct fatigue cracking in the left- and right-side lower skin panels 
and stringers of the center wing, which could result in structural 
failure of the wings and consequent loss of control of the airplane. 
This action is intended to address the identified unsafe condition.

DATES: Effective September 26, 2002.
    Comments for inclusion in the Rules Docket must be received on or 
before November 25, 2002.

ADDRESSES: Submit comments in triplicate to the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), Transport Airplane Directorate, ANM-114, 
Attention: Rules Docket No. 2002-NM-235-AD, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., 
Renton, Washington 98055-4056. Comments may be inspected at this 
location between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m., Monday through Friday, except 
Federal holidays. Comments may be submitted via fax to (425) 227-1232. 
Comments may also be sent via the Internet using the following address: 
<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection#9da4b0fcf3f0b0f4fceffef2f0f0f8f3e9ddfbfcfcb3faf2eb"><span class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="9aa3b7fbf4f7b7f3fbe8f9f5f7f7fff4eedafcfbfbb4fdf5ec">[email&#160;protected]</span></a>. Comments sent via fax or the Internet must 
contain ``Docket No. 2002-NM-235-AD'' in the subject line and need not 
be submitted in triplicate. Comments sent via the Internet as attached 
electronic files must be formatted in Microsoft Word 97 for Windows or 
ASCII text.
    Information pertaining to this AD may be examined at the FAA, 
Transport Airplane Directorate, 1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, 
Washington; or at the FAA, Atlanta Aircraft Certification Office, One 
Crown Center, 1895 Phoenix Boulevard, suite 450, Atlanta, Georgia.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: William Herderich, Aerospace Engineer, 
Airframe and Propulsion Branch, ACE-117A, FAA, Atlanta Aircraft 
Certification Office, One Crown Center, 1895 Phoenix Boulevard, suite 
450, Atlanta, Georgia 30349; telephone (770) 703-6082; fax (770) 703-
6097.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: On June 17, 2002, while dropping retardant 
on a fire near Walker, California, a United States Department of 
Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service Model C-130A airplane was involved in 
an accident, resulting from the structural failure of the center wing. 
Investigation revealed fatigue cracking in the lower skin panels and 
stringers of the center wing. The cause of such fatigue cracking has 
been attributed to the age, time-in-service, and flight cycles of the 
airplane. Such fatigue cracking, if not detected and corrected, could 
result in structural failure of the wings and consequent loss of 
control of the airplane.

FAA's Determination

    We have determined that extensive cracking (multiple-site damage 
(MSD)) of the left- and right-side lower skin panels of the center wing 
between wing stations 41.0 and 71.0 and the front and rear spars, is 
likely to occur on Lockheed C-130A airplanes, type certificated in the 
restricted category. Repetitive inspections of these areas are 
necessary to ensure that cracks will be detected, and corrective action 
taken, to preclude crack growth to a size that would create an 
unacceptable risk of structural failure.
    MSD is characterized by the simultaneous presence, at multiple 
locations, of relatively small fatigue cracks that have the same 
geometry and stress level. The presence of MSD is usually an indicator 
of normal fatigue wearout, as opposed to any kind of an anomaly (e.g., 
material or manufacturing defect). The length of critical MSD cracks is 
typically much smaller than that of a single, isolated critical crack.
    Based on the reports of cracking, we have determined that the 
repetitive inspections required by this AD will focus on fastener holes 
penetrating the lower skin panels and stringers of the center wing in 
the affected areas. Due to the nature of MSD cracking, the cracks that 
will need to be detected are very small, perhaps less than 0.10 inch in 
length. While inspection methodologies exist that can be used to detect 
cracks of this size, we are currently unaware of any for Lockheed C-
130A airplanes, type certificated in the restricted category. 
Therefore, owners and operators must submit inspection procedures and 
repetitive inspection intervals to the Manager, Atlanta Aircraft 
Certification Office (ACO), FAA. The inspection procedures must be 
sufficiently reliable to determine the location and orientation of 
cracks that are very small, perhaps less than 0.10 inch in length. A 
potential inspection method would be to develop an inspection procedure 
using a bolt hole eddy current technique, develop a reference standard 
to calibrate the test instruments, and then use the developed 
inspection procedures and calibrated instruments to detect cracks. 
Other potential inspection methods include eddy current, eddy current 
arrays, and ultrasonic techniques. Certain types of inspections, such 
as a radiographic, are inadequate to detect small crack lengths. 
Because of the potential catastrophic nature of this cracking, the 
initial inspection must be performed within 4 days after the effective 
date of this AD.
    Repetitive inspections must be performed at intervals that prevent 
crack growth from exceeding the minimum residual strength required to 
support ultimate load on the affected structure. These repetitive 
inspection intervals must be based on a damage tolerance assessment of 
the skin panels and stringers. Guidance for damage tolerance procedures 
may be found in Advisory Circular (AC) 25.571-1C, dated April 29, 1998.
    If any crack is detected during any inspection, operators must 
replace the cracked part with a new part; or repair and inspect at new 
intervals based on a damage-tolerance assessment of the wing panels and 
stringers, per a method approved by the Atlanta ACO. The repair must 
include a damage tolerance assessment as noted above, in addition to 
analysis showing static strength capability in compliance with the 
certification basis of the airplane. In the case of the repair, 
determination of new inspection intervals based on a damage-tolerance 
assessment of the repaired wing panels and stringers is necessary, 
because the repair may alter the inspection intervals that are 
necessary in order to detect cracks before the structure fails. 
Conversely, in the case of a replacement with a new part, the 
inspection intervals that apply to the unrepaired structure continue to 
be applicable.
    In addition, operators must report the results of inspections to 
the Atlanta ACO. As a minimum, the report must include the following 
information:
    [sbull] Airplane manufacturer's serial number(s);
    [sbull] Time-in-service of airplane;
    [sbull] Applicable type certificate data sheet;
    [sbull] Description of usage under which the restricted category 
was issued (see 14 CFR part 21.25(b));
    [sbull] Part numbers and time-in-service of damaged and undamaged 
parts; and
    [sbull] Diagram(s) showing the location and orientation of cracks, 
and if available, the length of cracks.

Explanation of the Requirements of the Rule

    Since an unsafe condition has been identified that is likely to 
exist or develop on other Lockheed C-130A airplanes, type certificated 
in the restricted category, this AD is being issued to detect and 
correct fatigue cracking in the left- and right-side lower skin panels 
and stringers of the center wing, which could result in structural 
failure of the wings and consequent loss

[[Page 60560]]

of control of the airplane. This AD requires repetitive inspections to 
detect cracks at fastener holes in the left- and right-side lower skin 
panels and stringers of the center wing between wing stations 41.0 and 
71.0; and replacement of any cracked part with a new part, or repair 
and inspections at new intervals. This AD also requires operators to 
submit a report of the inspection findings to the FAA.

Interim Action

    This is considered to be interim action until final action is 
identified, at which time we may consider further rulemaking.

Determination of Rule's Effective Date

    Since a situation exists that requires the immediate adoption of 
this regulation, it is found that notice and opportunity for prior 
public comment hereon are impracticable, and that good cause exists for 
making this amendment effective in less than 30 days.

Comments Invited

    Although this action is in the form of a final rule that involves 
requirements affecting flight safety and, thus, was not preceded by 
notice and an opportunity for public comment, comments are invited on 
this rule. Interested persons are invited to comment on this rule by 
submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. 
Communications shall identify the Rules Docket number and be submitted 
in triplicate to the address specified under the caption ADDRESSES. All 
communications received on or before the closing date for comments will 
be considered, and this rule may be amended in light of the comments 
received. Factual information that supports the commenter's ideas and 
suggestions is extremely helpful in evaluating the effectiveness of the 
AD action and determining whether additional rulemaking action would be 
needed.
    Submit comments using the following format:
    [sbull] Organize comments issue-by-issue. For example, discuss a 
request to change the compliance time and a request to change the 
service bulletin reference as two separate issues.
    [sbull] For each issue, state what specific change to the AD is 
being requested.
    [sbull] Include justification (e.g., reasons or data) for each 
request.
    Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory, 
economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the rule that might 
suggest a need to modify the rule. All comments submitted will be 
available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the 
Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report that 
summarizes each FAA-public contact concerned with the substance of this 
AD will be filed in the Rules Docket.
    Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments 
submitted in response to this rule must submit a self-addressed, 
stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: ``Comments 
to Docket Number 2002-NM-235-AD.'' The postcard will be date stamped 
and returned to the commenter.

Regulatory Impact

    The regulations adopted herein will not have a substantial direct 
effect on the States, on the relationship between the national 
Government and the States, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government. Therefore, it 
is determined that this final rule does not have federalism 
implications under Executive Order 13132.
    The FAA has determined that this regulation is an emergency 
regulation that must be issued immediately to correct an unsafe 
condition in aircraft, and that it is not a ``significant regulatory 
action'' under Executive Order 12866. It has been determined further 
that this action involves an emergency regulation under DOT Regulatory 
Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979). If it is 
determined that this emergency regulation otherwise would be 
significant under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures, a final 
regulatory evaluation will be prepared and placed in the Rules Docket. 
A copy of it, if filed, may be obtained from the Rules Docket at the 
location provided under the caption ADDRESSES.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39

    Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety.

Adoption of the Amendment

    Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the 
Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration amends part 39 of 
the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) as follows:

PART 39--AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES

    1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40113, 44701.


Sec.  39.13  [Amended]

    2. Section 39.13 is amended by adding the following new 
airworthiness directive:

2002-19-14 Lockheed C-130A Airplanes: Amendment 39-12894. Docket 
2002-NM-235-A

    D.Applicability: Including, but not limited to, all of the 
following Lockheed C-130A airplanes, type certificated in the 
restricted category:
    Central Air Service, Inc., Model C-130A airplanes, Type 
Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS) No. A39CE, Revision 2;
    Hawkins & Powers Aviation, Inc., Model HP-C-130A airplanes, TCDS 
No. A30NM, Revision 1;
    Hemet Valley Flying Service Model C-130A airplanes, TCDS No. 
A31NM, Revision 0;
    LeSEA Model C-130A airplanes, TCDS No. A34SO, Revision 0;
    Snow Aviation International, Inc., Model C-130A airplanes, TCDS 
No. TQ3CH, Revision 1;
    United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service 
Model C-130A airplanes, TCDS No. A15NM, Revision 4;
    Western International Aviation, Inc., Model C-130A airplanes, 
TCDS No. A33NM, Revision 0; and
    Any other surplus Military C-130A airplanes.

    Note 1: This AD applies to each airplane identified in the 
preceding applicability provision, regardless of whether it has been 
modified, altered, or repaired in the area subject to the 
requirements of this AD. For airplanes that have been modified, 
altered, or repaired so that the performance of the requirements of 
this AD is affected, the owner/operator must request approval for an 
alternative method of compliance in accordance with paragraph (d) of 
this AD. The request should include an assessment of the effect of 
the modification, alteration, or repair on the unsafe condition 
addressed by this AD; and, if the unsafe condition has not been 
eliminated, the request should include specific proposed actions to 
address it.

    Compliance: Required as indicated, unless accomplished 
previously.
    To detect and correct fatigue cracking in the left- and right-
side lower skin panels and stringers of the center wing, which could 
result in structural failure of the wings and consequent loss of 
control of the airplane, accomplish the following:

Inspection

    (a) Within 4 days after the effective date of this AD, do the 
actions specified in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this AD per a 
method approved by the Manager, Atlanta Aircraft Certification 
Office (ACO), FAA.
    (1) Do an inspection to detect cracks at fastener holes in the 
left- and right-side lower skin panels and stringers of the center 
wing between wing stations 41.0 and 71.0. The inspection procedures 
must be sufficiently reliable to determine the location and 
orientation of cracks that are very small, perhaps less than 0.10 
inch in length.
    (2) Develop repetitive inspection intervals that prevent crack 
growth from exceeding the

[[Page 60561]]

minimum residual strength required to support ultimate load on the 
affected structure. The repetitive inspection intervals must be 
based on a damage-tolerance assessment of the wing panels and 
stringers and be approved by the Manager, Atlanta ACO. Guidance for 
damage tolerance procedures may be found in Advisory Circular (AC) 
25.571-1C, dated April 29, 1998. Thereafter, do the inspection 
approved per paragraph (a)(1) of this AD at the intervals approved 
per this paragraph.
    (b) If any crack is detected during any inspection required by 
this AD, before further flight, do the action(s) specified in 
paragraph (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this AD.
    (1) Replace the cracked part with a new part and continue to 
inspect per paragraph (a) of this AD.
    (2) Repair and inspect at new intervals based on a damage-
tolerance assessment of the wing panels and stringers, per a method 
approved by the Manager, Atlanta ACO. The repair must include a 
damage-tolerance assessment as noted above, in addition to an 
analysis showing static strength capability in compliance with the 
certification basis of the airplane. Guidance for damage tolerance 
procedures may be found in Advisory Circular (AC) 25.571-1C, dated 
April 29, 1998.

Reporting Requirement

    (c) Within 10 days after accomplishing the initial inspection 
required by paragraph (a)(1) of this AD, submit a report of the 
inspection results (both positive and negative) to the Manager, FAA, 
Atlanta Aircraft Certification Office, One Crown Center, 1895 
Phoenix Boulevard, suite 450, Atlanta, Georgia 30349; fax (770) 703-
6097. Information collection requirements contained in this AD have 
been approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under the 
provisions of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et 
seq.) and have been assigned OMB Control Number 2120-0056. As a 
minimum, the report must include:
    (1) Airplane manufacturer's serial number(s);
    (2) Time-in-service of airplane;
    (3) Applicable TCDS;
    (4) Description of usage under which the restricted category was 
issued (see 14 CFR part 21.25(b));
    (5) Part numbers and time-in-service of damaged and undamaged 
parts; and

    Note 2: Reports of ``rehabed'' wings indicate that wing panels 
and stringers may have been replaced.

    (6) Diagram(s) showing the location and orientation of cracks, 
and if available, the length of cracks.

Alternative Methods of Compliance

    (d) An alternative method of compliance or adjustment of the 
compliance time that provides an acceptable level of safety may be 
used if approved by the Manager, Atlanta ACO. Operators shall submit 
their requests through an appropriate FAA Principal Maintenance 
Inspector, who may add comments and then send it to the Manager, 
Atlanta ACO.

    Note 3: Information concerning the existence of approved 
alternative methods of compliance with this AD, if any, may be 
obtained from the Atlanta ACO.

Special Flight Permits

    (e) Special flight permits may be issued in accordance with 
sections 21.197 and 21.199 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 
CFR 21.197 and 21.199) to operate the airplane to a location where 
the requirements of this AD can be accomplished.

Effective Date

    (f) This amendment becomes effective on September 26, 2002.

    Issued in Renton, Washington, on September 20, 2002.
Vi L. Lipski,
Manager, Transport Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification 
Service.
[FR Doc. 02-24416 Filed 9-23-02; 12:24 pm]
BILLING CODE 4910-13-P


</pre><script data-cfasync="false" src="/cdn-cgi/scripts/5c5dd728/cloudflare-static/email-decode.min.js"></script></body>
</html>