<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 68 Issue 21 (Friday, January 31, 2003)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 68, Number 21 (Friday, January 31, 2003)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 4905-4910]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 03-1956]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Federal Aviation Administration

14 CFR Part 39

[Docket No. 2000-CE-05-AD; Amendment 39-13037; AD 2003-03-13]
RIN 2120-AA64


Airworthiness Directives; MORAVAN a.s. Model Z-242L Airplanes

AGENCY: Federal Aviation Administration, DOT.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 4906]]

SUMMARY: This amendment adopts a new airworthiness directive (AD) that 
applies to all MORAVAN a.s. (Moravan) Model Z-242L airplanes. This AD 
establishes a technical service life for these airplanes by restricting 
Acrobatic and Utility category operations and requiring replacement of 
the wings after a certain operational time period. This AD is the 
result of mandatory continuing airworthiness information (MCAI) issued 
by the airworthiness authority for the Czech Republic. The actions 
specified by this AD are intended to prevent structural failure of the 
wing due to fatigue cracking. Such failure could result in a wing 
separating from the airplane with consequent loss of airplane control.

DATES: This AD becomes effective on March 21, 2003.
    The Director of the Federal Register approved the incorporation by 
reference of certain publications listed in the regulations as of March 
21, 2003.

ADDRESSES: You may get the service information referenced in this AD 
from Moravan, Inc., 765 81 Otrokovice, Czech Republic; telephone: +420 
67 767 3940; facsimile: +420 67 792 2103. You may view this information 
at the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Central Region, Office of 
the Regional Counsel, Attention: Rules Docket No. 2000-CE-05-AD, 901 
Locust, Room 506, Kansas City, Missouri 64106; or at the Office of the 
Federal Register, 800 North Capitol Street, NW, suite 700, Washington, 
DC.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Doug Rudolph, Aerospace Engineer, FAA, 
Small Airplane Directorate, 901 Locust, Room 301, Kansas City, Missouri 
64106; telephone: (816) 329-4059; facsimile: (816) 329-4090.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Discussion

What Events Have Caused This AD?

    The Civil Aviation Authority Czech Republic (CAA CZ), which is the 
airworthiness authority for the Czech Republic, notified FAA that an 
unsafe condition may exist on all Moravan Model Z-242L airplanes. The 
CAA CZ reports that these airplanes are operated over the load spectrum 
that was used at certification. The CAA CZ further reports that a 
technical service life for these airplanes is needed. The affected 
airplanes fall into two different groups:

--Group 1: those airplanes with a serial number in the range of 0001 
through 0656 with the original wings installed; and
--Group 2: those airplanes with stronger wings installed either through 
modification (serial numbers 0001 through 0656) or at manufacture (all 
serial numbers beginning with 0657).

    Based on analysis, the CAA CZ reports that the technical service 
life should be:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Acrobatic and utility
                                  category operations    All operations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Group 1.......................  190 hours time-in-      3,500 hours TIS.
                                 service (TIS) only in   New wings must
                                 these categories.       be installed
                                 Operation only in the   prior to
                                 Normal category         further
                                 thereafter.             operation.
Group 2.......................  450 hours TIS only in   5,500 hours TIS.
                                 these categories.       New wings must
                                 Operation only in the   be installed
                                 Normal category         prior to
                                 thereafter.             further
                                                         operation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

What Is the Potential Impact if FAA Took No Action?

    Fatigue cracks in the wing, if not detected and corrected or 
prevented, could result in structural failure of the wing. Such failure 
could result in a wing separating from the airplane with consequent 
loss of airplane control.

Has FAA Taken Any Action to This Point?

    We issued a proposal to amend part 39 of the Federal Aviation 
Regulations (14 CFR part 39) to include an AD that would apply to all 
Moravan Model Z-242L airplanes. This proposal was published in the 
Federal Register as a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) on October 
4, 2002 (67 FR 62214). The NPRM proposed to establish a technical 
service life for these airplanes by restricting Acrobatic and Utility 
category operations and requiring replacement of the wings after a 
certain operational time period.

Was the Public Invited to Comment?

    The FAA encouraged interested persons to participate in the making 
of this amendment. The following presents the comments received on the 
proposal and FAA's response to each comment:

Comment Issue No. 1: Delay the AD Until Moravan America Completes an 
Analysis of the Problem and Presents an Alternative

What Is the Commenters' Concern?

    Several commenters request that FAA delay issuing the final rule AD 
until after Moravan America has a chance to present an alternative to 
the actions specified in the NPRM. Specific comments in this area are 
as follows:

--One of the alternatives that Moravan America is working on allows an 
extension of the 450-hour time-in-service (TIS) Acrobatic and Utility 
operations life limit to 700 hours TIS. This would only apply to 
airplanes with strengthened wings;
--Moravan America will produce a service bulletin tailored to the 
operational characteristics of the U.S. safety assurance system and 
will provide operational guidelines and a measurement system for 
exceeding load limits. Included in this service bulletin would be 
guidelines for continued airworthiness and operational constraints;
--The FAA should delay issuing this AD until Moravan America has a 
chance to evaluate all the facts leading to the issuance of the Czech 
Republic AD. The Moravan America proposed solution will be a better 
option; and
--Moravan America can have a proposed alternative to this AD within 90 
days.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    The FAA is continuing with this AD action. However, we will add a 
grace period of ``90 days after the effective date of this AD'' to the 
compliance time of the life limits in the Utility and Acrobatic 
categories. This would make the compliance time ``upon accumulating 
either 190 hours TIS or 450 hours TIS in the Utility or Acrobatic 
category or on or before June 10, 2003 (90 days after the effective 
date of this AD), whichever occurs later.'' This compliance time change 
will give Moravan America the time it needs to develop an alternative 
method of compliance and service bulletin for FAA approval.
    Based on data submitted, we may approve an alternative method of 
compliance and amend the AD, as appropriate.

[[Page 4907]]

Comment Issue No. 2: The Life Limit for Airplanes With Strengthened 
Wings Should Be 5,500 Hours Time-in-Service (TIS)

What Is the Commenter's Concern?

    One commenter states that the life limit for airplanes with the 
strengthened wings should be 5,500 hours TIS. We infer that the 
commenter wants the NPRM changed to reflect this.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We partially concur. The life limit for the affected airplanes with 
strengthened wings is 5,500 hours TIS while operated in the Normal 
category. The life limit for these airplanes in the Utility and 
Acrobatic categories is 450 hours TIS. After the sum of time in the 
Utility and Acrobatic categories equals 450 hours TIS or within 90 days 
after the effective date of the AD (whichever occurs later), you may 
only operate the airplane in the Normal category until the accumulation 
of 5,500 hours TIS. Utility and Acrobatic category operation would be 
prohibited until the installation of new wings.
    The life limits for Utility and Acrobatic category operation and 
Normal category operation would start over again after replacement of 
the wings.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 3: Allow a Life Limit Extension Through Installation 
of the AMU1 Monitoring Unit

What Is the Commenters' Concern?

    Several commenters request that FAA change the NPRM to allow those 
airplanes that incorporate the strengthened wings to operate past 450 
hours TIS in the Utility and Acrobatic categories if an AMU1 
(acceleration monitoring unit) is installed. The commenters state that 
this unit regularly monitors the load factors on the primary structure 
and evaluates the measured load spectrum and collates it with the CAA-
FAA and ZLIN-A spectrums. The commenters feel that this AMU1 unit has 
had an indisputable and substantial impact on increasing the safe 
fatigue life on the Model Z-242L airplanes.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We do not concur that the AMU1 unit should be part of the proposed 
AD. The CAA CZ examined all the available data and decided that these 
airplanes should be life limited to the levels described in the NPRM.
    We have determined that these life limit values are valid and that 
allowing all airplanes to exceed these values through the use of an 
acceleration monitoring unit does not address the unsafe condition. The 
FAA will evaluate requests for this option on an individual basis and 
may issue alternative methods of compliance provided the request is 
made in accordance with the procedures in paragraph (e) of the AD and 
provides a level of safety acceptable to FAA.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 4: Allow Moravan to Extend the Life Limits on a Case-
by-Case Basis

What Is the Commenters' Concern?

    Several commenters state that Moravan has the capability of 
approving the data from the acceleration monitoring unit and allowing 
continued operation past the specified life limits. The commenters 
further state that Moravan recognizes the information from both the 
AMU1 unit and the Corsa Data Acquisition System (CDAS) in allowing the 
affected airplanes to operate past the 450-hour TIS life limit in the 
Utility and Acrobatic categories and operate to the 5,500-hour TIS 
Normal category life limit.
    The commenters suggest that FAA give Moravan the authority to allow 
the affected airplane operators to operate past the Utility and 
Acrobatic life limit categories.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We do not concur. As earlier stated, the CAA CZ examined all the 
available data and decided that these airplanes should be life limited 
to the levels described in the NPRM. We have determined that these life 
limits are valid.
    The FAA is not allowed to delegate its rulemaking authority to an 
aircraft manufacturer. Allowing Moravan to determine whether an 
airplane can exceed these values through the use of an AMU1 or CDAS 
would be the same as delegating our rulemaking authority.
    We will evaluate requests for this option on an individual basis 
and may issue alternative methods of compliance provided the request is 
found to be at a level of safety acceptable to FAA and is made in 
accordance with the procedures in paragraph (e) of the AD.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 5: Allow a Root Wing Modification

What Is the Commenter's Concern?

    One commenter recommends that FAA add the option of incorporating a 
wing root modification to allow operation in the Utility and Acrobatic 
categories to 3,500 hours TIS. This is for airplanes with 
unstrengthened wings that are not eligible for the AMU1 method to 
increase operation to the 5,500 hours TIS.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We do not concur. As earlier stated, the CAA CZ examined all the 
available data and decided that these airplanes should be life limited 
to the levels described in the NPRM. We have determined that these life 
limits are valid.
    Moravan has superseded the service bulletin that incorporated the 
referenced root wing modification, and the CAA CZ does not have current 
AD action that references this root wing modification. The FAA has 
examined all of the information available from CAA CZ and has 
determined that the root wing modification is not a valid option for 
this AD action.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 6: The Model Z-242L Airplanes Should Either Be 
Eliminated From the AD or Not Have Utility and Acrobatic Category Life 
Limit Restrictions

What Is the Commenters' Concern?

    Several comments state that both the CAA CZ and FAA have approved 
fatigue testing done on 3 Model Z242L airplanes that shows that the 
airplanes can be operated to 5,500 hours TIS without any life limits on 
Utility or Acrobatic category operations. These commenters recommend 
that we remove the Utility and Acrobatic category life limit 
requirement from the AD for the Model Z-242L airplanes.
    Another commenter states that the service history on this subject 
matter is only for the earlier manufactured airplane models and no data 
exists for the Model Z-242L airplanes. The airplane models that the 
commenter refers to are not certificated for operation in the United 
States. This commenter recommends that FAA withdraw the NPRM.
    One commenter states that the proposed AD action is based on an 
accident of a Model Z-142 airplane (not certificated in the United 
States) in Australia. The commenter points out that the wing on the 
Model Z-242L has a totally different design and should not be affected 
by the subject matter in this AD. The commenter proposes that FAA 
withdraw the NPRM.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    The FAA does not concur that the Model Z-242L airplanes should be

[[Page 4908]]

excluded from the AD or exempt from the Utility and Acrobatic category 
life limit requirements. We concur that there may be differences in the 
design of the aircraft, but we do not concur that the Model Z-242L is 
not affected by this subject matter. The CAA CZ has approved the life 
limits that are included in this AD for the Model Z-242L airplanes, and 
FAA has determined that they are valid for these airplanes that are 
registered in the United States. The FAA has to issue an AD to mandate 
the reduction in a life limit or a change or addition of an 
airworthiness limitation, even if the reduction, change, or addition is 
FAA-approved. Therefore, the AD is necessary in order to ensure the 
life limits are required.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 7: Why Issue an AD When the Life Limits Are Already 
Published in the Maintenance Manual

What Is the Commenter's Concern?

    One commenter states that the current life limits are already in 
force because the manufacturer included them in a revision to the 
maintenance manual. Because of this, the commenter believes the AD is 
unnecessary and requests that FAA withdraw the NPRM.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We do not concur that the AD is unnecessary and the NPRM should be 
withdrawn. There are distinct differences between the CAA CZ and FAA's 
rulemaking processes. If the CAA CZ determines an airworthiness 
limitation should be added or a life limit should be reduced, it only 
has to stamp CAA CZ approved on the document (service bulletin or 
maintenance manual revision) to enforce the change. The FAA has to 
issue an AD to mandate the reduction in a life limit or a change or 
addition of an airworthiness limitation, even if the reduction, change, 
or addition is FAA-approved. Therefore, the AD is necessary in order to 
ensure the life limits are required.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 8: Allow the Option of Repetitive Inspections Instead 
of Wing Replacement

What Is the Commenter's Concern?

    One commenter requests that FAA allow repetitive inspection of the 
wings once one of the affected airplanes reaches the life limit in 
Utility and Acrobatic operations. The commenter believes that the 
aircraft could then continue to fly until it reached the total hours 
TIS life limit provided no cracks are found during the inspections. The 
commenter states that this would provide the same level of safety 
because cracks would be detected before failure, and then FAA could 
mandate replacement of the wings when the cracks were found.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    There currently are no procedures available for detecting cracks in 
the wings of the affected airplanes. The CAA CZ has not approved 
inspections in this area and has approved the life limits. Therefore, 
we are mandating the life limits through this AD action.
    We would consider repetitive inspections as an alternative method 
of compliance provided the method:

--included procedures that provided details on how the onset of the 
fatigue damage was going to be detected;
--was submitted in accordance with the procedures specified in this AD; 
and
--provided a level of safety that was acceptable to FAA.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 9: The Cost of This AD Is Too High

What Is the Commenters' Concern?

    Several commenters request that FAA not issue the AD because of the 
high cost.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    The FAA does not concur. While we do take the cost impact into 
consideration on AD actions, the most important aspect is the safety 
issue. The passenger injuries that might be prevented through 
compliance with this AD outweigh the cost of compliance with this AD. 
We have determined that the CAA CZ life limits are valid and should be 
mandated for airplanes certificated for operation in the United States. 
We will approve any alternative method of compliance from the 
commenters provided it is submitted in accordance with the procedures 
in the AD and we determine that it provides an acceptable level of 
safety.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

Comment Issue No. 10: How Do You Track Utility and Acrobatic Time?

What Is the Commenter's Concern?

    One commenter wants clarification on how time in the Utility and 
Acrobatic categories is calculated. This commenter states that no U.S. 
operator has an accurate account of acrobatic time at this point so all 
wings would have to be replaced or no one is going to claim the right 
number of hours in these categories.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We concur that it could be difficult to account for the number of 
hours TIS previously accumulated in the Utility and Acrobatic 
categories. However, the CAA CZ established the limits in the Utility 
and Acrobatic categories at 190 or 450 hours TIS and we have determined 
that they are valid and should be mandated for airplanes certificated 
for operation in the United States. As previously discussed, we are 
adding a grace period of ``90 days after the effective date of this 
AD'' to the compliance time of the life limits in the Utility and 
Acrobatic categories. This would make the compliance time ``upon 
accumulating either 190 hours TIS or 450 hours TIS in the Utility or 
Acrobatic category or on or before June 10, 2003 (90 days after the 
effective date of this AD), whichever occurs later.''
    All operators will have at least 90 days before they are restricted 
from operations in the Utility and Acrobatic categories.
    We have added procedures to the AD on how to track time in the 
Acrobatic and Utility categories. These procedures are also specified 
in Moravan Mandatory Service Bulletin Z 242L/37a (Z 142C/17a), Rev. 1, 
dated October 31, 2000; and Moravan Mandatory Service Bulletin Z 242L/
38a (Z 142C/18a), dated October 31, 2000.

Comment Issue No. 11: Aircraft Equipped With Nitrogen Spars Should Be 
Exempt From the AD

What Is the Commenter's Concern?

    One commenter states that the life limits are not valid because the 
affected airplanes are equipped with nitrogen spars. With these spars, 
you can detect cracks through pressure leakage. The commenter believes 
that because of these early signs of failure, it is inconceivable that 
the wings will fall off due to stress. The commenter requests that FAA 
withdraw the NPRM.

What Is FAA's Response to the Concern?

    We do not concur that the AD action is not valid because the 
affected airplanes are equipped with nitrogen spars. The CAA CZ was 
aware of this when it performed the analysis to determine the life 
limits. We have determined that the CAA CZ life limits are valid and 
should be mandated for airplanes certificated for operation in the 
United States.
    We are not changing the final rule AD action as a result of this 
comment.

[[Page 4909]]

FAA's Determination

What Is FAA's Final Determination on This Issue?

    After careful review of all available information related to the 
subject presented above, we have determined that air safety and the 
public interest require the adoption of the rule as proposed except for 
the compliance time change, the addition of procedures on how to track 
time in the Acrobatic and Utility categories, and minor editorial 
corrections. We have determined that the change, the addition, and the 
minor editorial corrections:

--provide the intent that was proposed in the NPRM for correcting the 
unsafe condition; and
--do not add any additional burden upon the public than was already 
proposed in the NPRM.

Cost Impact

How Many Airplanes Does This AD Impact?

    We estimate that this AD affects 39 airplanes in the U.S. registry.

What Is the Cost Impact of This AD on Owners/Operators of the Affected 
Airplanes?

    We estimate the following costs to replace the wings after the 
technical service life is reached:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                                                     Total cost
                   Labor cost                                 Parts cost               Total cost      on U.S.
                                                                                      per airplane    operators
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
60 work hours x $60 per hour = $3,600...........  $17,400 per set of wings..........      $21,000      $819,000
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    We have no way of determining the monetary cost of the 
inconvenience of restricting flight to Normal category operations.

Regulatory Impact

Does This AD Impact Various Entities?

    The regulations adopted herein will not have a substantial direct 
effect on the States, on the relationship between the national 
government and the States, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government. Therefore, it 
is determined that this final rule does not have federalism 
implications under Executive Order 13132.

Does This AD Involve a Significant Rule or Regulatory Action?

    For the reasons discussed above, I certify that this action (1) is 
not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive Order 12866; 
(2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOT Regulatory Policies and 
Procedures (44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979); and (3) will not have a 
significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial 
number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act. A copy of the final evaluation prepared for this 
action is contained in the Rules Docket. A copy of it may be obtained 
by contacting the Rules Docket at the location provided under the 
caption ADDRESSES.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39

    Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by 
reference, Safety.

Adoption of the Amendment

    Accordingly, under the authority delegated to me by the 
Administrator, the Federal Aviation Administration amends part 39 of 
the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 39) as follows:

PART 39--AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES

    1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40113, 44701.


Sec.  39.13  [Amended]

    2. FAA amends Sec.  39.13 by adding a new AD to read as follows:

2003-03-13 MORAVAN A.S.: Amendment 39-13037; Docket No. 2000-CE-05-
AD.

    (a) What airplanes are affected by this AD? This AD affects 
Model Z-242L airplanes, all serial numbers, that are certificated in 
any category.
    (b) Who must comply with this AD? Anyone who wishes to operate 
any of the airplanes identified in paragraph (a) of this AD must 
comply with this AD.
    (c) What problem does this AD address? The actions specified by 
this AD are intended to prevent structural failure of the wing due 
to fatigue cracking. Such failure could result in a wing separating 
from the airplane with consequent loss of airplane control.
    (d) What actions must I accomplish to address this problem? To 
address this problem, you must establish a technical service life 
and restrict Acrobatic and Utility category operations. This must be 
done by accomplishing the following, as applicable:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
           Actions                 Compliance            Procedures
------------------------------------------------------------------------
(1) You must annotate         As of the March 21,   This is specified in
 Acrobatic and Utility         2003 (the effective   Moravan Mandatory
 category operational time     date of this AD).     Service Bulletin Z
 in the logbook. If the                              242L/37a (Z 142C/
 airplane is utilized in                             17a), Rev. 1, dated
 either of these categories                          October 31, 2000;
 at any time during a                                and Moravan
 flight, you must annotate                           Mandatory Service
 the total time for that                             Bulletin Z 242L/38a
 flight in the Utility or                            (Z 142C/18a), dated
 Acrobatic category, as                              October 31, 2000.
 appropriate. The owner/
 operator holding at least a
 private pilot certificate
 as authorized by section
 43.7 of the Federal
 Aviation Regulations (14
 CFR 43.7) may annotate the
 logbook.
-----------------------------

[[Page 4910]]

 
(2) If you have an airplane   AFM incorporation:    AFM incorporation:
 with a serial number in the   Upon the              The owner/operator
 range of 0001 through 0656    accumulation of 190   holding at least a
 that does not have            hours time-in-        private pilot
 strengthened wings            service (TIS) in      certificate as
 installed (both left and      the Acrobatic         authorized by
 right wings) in accordance    category and/or       section 43.7 of the
 with Moravan Mandatory        Utility category or   Federal Aviation
 Service Bulletin Z 242L/      on or before June     Regulations (14 CFR
 27a--Rev. 1, dated October    10, 2003 (90 days     43.7) may
 31, 2000, accomplish the      after the effective   accomplish this AFM
 following:.                   date of this AD),     insertion of this
(i) Insert the following       whichever occurs      AD. Make an entry
 information into the          later; and            into the aircraft
 Limitations Section of the    Replacement: Upon     records showing
 Airplane Flight Manual        the accumulation of   compliance with
 (AFM): ``Do not operate in    3,500 hours TIS in    these portions of
 the Acrobatic or Utility      all operations or     the AD in
 category. Operate in the      within the next 50    accordance with
 Normal category only.''.      hours TIS in all      section 43.9 of the
(ii) Replace both wings with   operations after      Federal Aviation
 the following part numbers:.  March 21, 2003 (the   Regulations (14 CFR
(A) L 242.2100 left-hand       effective date of     43.9). This
 wing; and.                    this AD), whichever   operational
(B) L 242.2200 right-hand      occurs later.         restriction is
 wing.                                               referenced in
                                                     Moravan Mandatory
                                                     Service Bulletin Z
                                                     242L/37a (Z 142C/
                                                     17a), Rev. 1, dated
                                                     October 31, 2000.
                                                     Replacement: In
                                                     accordance with
                                                     Moravan Mandatory
                                                     Service Bulletin Z
                                                     242L/27a--Rev. 1,
                                                     dated October 31,
                                                     2000.
-----------------------------
(3) If you have an airplane   AFM incorporation:    AFM incorporation:
 with a serial number of       Upon the              The owner/operator
 0657 or higher or one in      accumulation of 450   holding at least a
 the range of 0001 through     hours (TIS) in the    private pilot
 0656 that has strengthened    Acrobatic category    certificate as
 wings (both left and right)   and/or Utility        authorized by
 installed in accordance       category or on or     section 43.7 of the
 with Moravan Mandatory        before June 10,       Federal Aviation
 Service Bulletin Z 242L/      2003 (90 days after   Regulations (14 CFR
 27a--Rev. 1, dated October    the effective date    43.7) may
 31, 2000, accomplish the      of this AD),          accomplish this AFM
 following:.                   whichever occurs      insertion of this
(i) Insert the following       later; and            AD. Make an entry
 information into the          Replacement: Upon     into the aircraft
 Limitations Section of the    the accumulation of   records showing
 Airplane Flight Manual        5,500 hours TIS in    compliance with
 (AFM): ``Do not operate in    all operations or     these portions of
 the Acrobatic or Utility      within the next 50    the AD in
 category. Operate in the      hours TIS after       accordance with
 Normal category only.''.      March 21, 2003 (the   section 43.9 of the
(ii) Replace both wings with   effective date of     Federal Aviation
 the following part numbers:.  this AD), whichever   Regulations (14 CFR
(A) L 242.2100 left-hand       occurs later. You     43.9). This
 wing; and.                    must maintain the     operational
(B) L 242.2200 right-hand      AFM requirement       restriction is
 wing.                         until replacement     referenced in
                               of the wings.         Moravan Mandatory
                                                     Service Bulletin Z
                                                     242L/38a (Z 142C/
                                                     18a), dated October
                                                     31, 2000.
                                                     Replacement: In
                                                     accordance with
                                                     Moravan Mandatory
                                                     Service Bulletin Z
                                                     242L/27a--Rev. 1,
                                                     dated October 31,
                                                     2000.
-----------------------------
(4) Only install a wing with  As of March 21, 2003  Not applicable.
 a part number of L 242.2100   (the effective date
 left-hand wing or L           of this AD).
 242.2200 right-hand wing.
-----------------------------
(5) When you install new      AFM incorporation:    See paragraph (d)(3)
 wings (both left and right)   Upon the              of this AD.
 on your airplane, the AFM     accumulation of 450
 and replacement               hours TIS in the
 requirements of paragraph     Acrobatic category
 (d)(2) of this AD apply.      and/or Utility
                               category; and
                               Replacement: Upon
                               the accumulation of
                               5,500 hours TIS in
                               all operations.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (e) Can I comply with this AD in any other way? You may use an 
alternative method of compliance or adjust the compliance time if:
    (1) Your alternative method of compliance provides an equivalent 
level of safety; and
    (2) The Manager, Standards Office, Small Airplane Directorate, 
approves your alternative. Submit your request through an FAA 
Principal Maintenance Inspector, who may add comments and then send 
it to the Manager, Standards Office, Small Airplane Directorate.

    Note 1: This AD applies to each airplane identified in paragraph 
(a) of this AD, regardless of whether it has been modified, altered, 
or repaired in the area subject to the requirements of this AD. For 
airplanes that have been modified, altered, or repaired so that the 
performance of the requirements of this AD is affected, the owner/
operator must request approval for an alternative method of 
compliance in accordance with paragraph (e) of this AD. The request 
should include an assessment of the effect of the modification, 
alteration, or repair on the unsafe condition addressed by this AD; 
and, if you have not eliminated the unsafe condition, specific 
actions you propose to address it.

    (f) Where can I get information about any already-approved 
alternative methods of compliance? Contact Doug Rudolph, Aerospace 
Engineer, FAA, Small Airplane Directorate, 901 Locust, Room 301, 
Kansas City, Missouri 64106; telephone: (816) 329-4059; facsimile: 
(816) 329-4090.
    (g) What if I need to fly the airplane to another location to 
comply with this AD? The FAA can issue a special flight permit under 
sections 21.197 and 21.199 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 
CFR 21.197 and 21.199) to operate your airplane to a location where 
you can accomplish the requirements of this AD.
    (h) Are any service bulletins incorporated into this AD by 
reference? The replacements required by this AD must be done in 
accordance with Moravan Mandatory Service Bulletin Z 242L/27a--Rev. 
1, dated October 31, 2000. The Director of the Federal Register 
approved this incorporation by reference under 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 
CFR part 51. You may get copies from Moravan, Inc., 765 81 
Otrokovice, Czech Republic; telephone: +420 67 767 3940; facsimile: 
+420 67 792 2103. You may view copies at the FAA, Central Region, 
Office of the Regional Counsel, 901 Locust, Room 506, Kansas City, 
Missouri, or at the Office of the Federal Register, 800 North 
Capitol Street, NW, suite 700, Washington, DC.

    Note 2: The subject of this AD is addressed in Czech Republic AD 
Number CAA-AD-T-099/2000R1, dated June 28, 2001.

    (i) When does this amendment become effective? This amendment 
becomes effective on March 21, 2003.

    Issued in Kansas City, Missouri, on January 21, 2003.
Michael Gallagher,
Manager, Small Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification Service.
[FR Doc. 03-1956 Filed 1-30-03; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4910-13-P


</pre></body>
</html>