<html>
<head>
<title>Federal Register, Volume 70 Issue 165 (Friday, August 26, 2005)</title>
</head>
<body><pre>
[Federal Register Volume 70, Number 165 (Friday, August 26, 2005)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 50160-50164]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [<a href="http://www.gpo.gov">www.gpo.gov</a>]
[FR Doc No: 05-16750]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

Federal Aviation Administration

14 CFR Part 39

[Docket No. FAA-2005-22168; Directorate Identifier 2005-NM-146-AD; 
Amendment 39-14234; AD 2005-17-13]
RIN 2120-AA64


Airworthiness Directives; Short Brothers Model SD3-60 Airplanes

AGENCY: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Department of 
Transportation (DOT).

[[Page 50161]]


ACTION: Final rule; request for comments.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The FAA is adopting a new airworthiness directive (AD) for all 
Short Brothers Model SD3-60 airplanes. This AD requires an inspection 
of the rudder for damage, an inspection of the balance weight 
attachment for discrepancies, an inspection of the rudder horn spar and 
cleats for cracking and corrosion, and corrective action if necessary. 
This AD results from events in which fatigue cracking was found on the 
rudder horn spar. We are issuing this AD to detect and correct cracking 
and corrosion of the rudder horn spar, which could lead to detachment 
of the mass balance weight of the rudder. The detachment of the mass 
balance weight could jam or restrict the movement of the rudder, which 
could result in reduced controllability of the airplane. Loss of a mass 
balance weight could also damage other parts of the airplane, which 
could result in reduced controllability of the airplane, or could 
result in an injury to a person or damage to property on the ground.

DATES: Effective September 12, 2005.
    The Director of the Federal Register approved the incorporation by 
reference of certain publications listed in the AD as of September 12, 
2005.
    We must receive comments on this AD by October 25, 2005.

ADDRESSES: Use one of the following addresses to submit comments on 
this AD.
    <bullet> DOT Docket Web site: Go to <a href="http://dms.dot.gov">http://dms.dot.gov</a> and follow 
the instructions for sending your comments electronically.
    <bullet> Government-wide rulemaking Web site: Go to <a href="http://www.regulations.gov">http://www.regulations.gov</a> and follow the instructions for sending your 
comments electronically.
    <bullet> Mail: Docket Management Facility; U.S. Department of 
Transportation, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Nassif Building, Room PL-401, 
Washington, DC 20590.
    <bullet> Fax: (202) 493-2251.
    <bullet> Hand Delivery: Room PL-401 on the plaza level of the 
Nassif Building, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC, between 9 
a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays.
    Contact Short Brothers, Airworthiness & Engineering Quality, P.O. 
Box 241, Airport Road, Belfast BT3 9DZ, Northern Ireland, for service 
information identified in this AD.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Todd Thompson, Aerospace Engineer, 
International Branch, ANM-116, FAA, Transport Airplane Directorate, 
1601 Lind Avenue, SW., Renton, Washington 98055-4056; telephone (425) 
227-1175; fax (425) 227-1149.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Discussion

    The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA), which is the airworthiness 
authority for the United Kingdom, notified us that an unsafe condition 
may exist on all Short Brothers Model SD3-60 airplanes. The CAA advises 
that there have been reports of fatigue cracking found on the rudder 
horn spar. In one event, the rudder horn spar failed and the lower mass 
balance weights detached from the rudder horn spar, which caused 
structural damage to the rudder's front spar, rib 14, and outer skin. 
Cracking of the rudder horn spar, if not corrected, could lead to 
detachment of the mass balance weight of the rudder. The detachment of 
the mass balance weight could jam or restrict the movement of the 
rudder, which could result in reduced controllability of the airplane. 
Loss of a mass balance weight could also damage other parts of the 
airplane, which could result in reduced controllability of the 
airplane, or could result in an injury to a person or damage to 
property on the ground.

Relevant Service Information

    Short Brothers has issued Alert Service Bulletin SD360-55-A22, 
Revision 1, dated August 4, 2005. The service bulletin describes 
procedures for doing a visual inspection of the rudder for damage and 
an inspection of the balance weight attachment for discrepancies 
(discrepancies include potential rudder restriction and detachment of 
the balance weight). The service bulletin also describes procedures for 
a detailed visual inspection of the rudder horn spar for cracking and 
corrosion, a borescope inspection of the cleats for cracking and 
corrosion, and corrective action if necessary. The corrective action 
includes replacement of the rudder horn spar and cleats as specified in 
Part C of the service bulletin and an optional temporary repair to the 
rudder horn spar that includes replacement of the cleats.
    The CAA mandated the service bulletin and issued British 
airworthiness directive G-2005-0021, dated July 6, 2005, to ensure the 
continued airworthiness of these airplanes in the United Kingdom.
    The service bulletin refers to Short Brothers Repair Drawing SD3-
03-6825XB, dated July 2005, as the appropriate source of service 
information for doing the temporary repair to the rudder horn spar 
including replacement of the cleats.

FAA's Determination and Requirements of This AD

    This airplane model is manufactured in the United Kingdom and is 
type certificated for operation in the United States under the 
provisions of section 21.29 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR 
21.29) and the applicable bilateral airworthiness agreement. Pursuant 
to this bilateral airworthiness agreement, the CAA has kept the FAA 
informed of the situation described above. We have examined the CAA's 
findings, evaluated all pertinent information, and determined that we 
need to issue an AD for products of this type design that are 
certificated for operation in the United States.
    Therefore, we are issuing this AD to detect and correct cracking 
and corrosion of the rudder horn spar, which could lead to detachment 
of the mass balance weight of the rudder. The detachment of the mass 
balance weight could jam or restrict the movement of the rudder, which 
could result in reduced controllability of the airplane. Loss of a mass 
balance weight could also damage other parts of the airplane, which 
could result in reduced controllability of the airplane, or could 
result in an injury to a person or damage to property on the ground. 
This AD requires accomplishing the actions specified in the service 
information described previously, except as discussed under 
``Differences Between the AD and the Service Bulletin.''

Differences Between the AD and the Service Bulletin

    When less than five cracks are detected in the rudder horn spar 
that are each 1 inch or less (and no cracks found on the cleats), 
Shorts Alert Service Bulletin SD360-55-A22 specifies to repetitively 
inspect every 25 flight cycles for up to 100 flight cycles. However, 
this AD does not permit further flight if any crack is detected in the 
rudder horn spar. We have determined that, because of the safety 
implications and consequences associated with that cracking, any crack 
found on the rudder horn spar must be repaired before further flight. 
In addition, the service bulletin does not specify what the corrective 
action is after 100 flight cycles. This AD requires either replacing 
the rudder horn spar with a new rudder horn spar and replacing the 
cleats, part number (P/N) SD3-33-6404XA and -6405XA, with new improved 
cleats; or doing the temporary repair and then replacing the rudder 
horn spar with a new rudder horn spar.

[[Page 50162]]

Clarification of Inspection Terminology

    In this AD, the ``visual inspection'' specified in the service 
bulletin is referred to as a ``general visual inspection.'' We have 
included the definition for a general visual inspection in a note in 
the AD.
    In this AD, the ``detailed visual inspection'' specified in the 
service bulletin is referred to as a ``detailed inspection.'' We have 
included the definition for a detailed inspection in a note in the AD.

Interim Action

    We consider this AD interim action. If final action is later 
identified, we may consider further rulemaking.

FAA's Determination of the Effective Date

    An unsafe condition exists that requires the immediate adoption of 
this AD; therefore, providing notice and opportunity for public comment 
before the AD is issued is impracticable, and good cause exists to make 
this AD effective in less than 30 days.

Comments Invited

    This AD is a final rule that involves requirements that affect 
flight safety and was not preceded by notice and an opportunity for 
public comment; however, we invite you to submit any relevant written 
data, views, or arguments regarding this AD. Send your comments to the 
address listed under the ADDRESSES section. Include ``Docket No. FAA-
2005-22168; Directorate Identifier 2005-NM-146-AD'' at the beginning of 
your comments. We specifically invite comments on the overall 
regulatory, economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the AD that 
might suggest a need to modify it.
    We will post all comments we receive, without change, to <a href="http://dms.dot.gov">http://dms.dot.gov</a>, including any personal information you provide. We will 
also post a report summarizing each substantive verbal contact with FAA 
personnel concerning this AD. Using the search function of that web 
site, anyone can find and read the comments in any of our dockets, 
including the name of the individual who sent the comment (or signed 
the comment on behalf of an association, business, labor union, etc.). 
You may review the DOT's complete Privacy Act Statement in the Federal 
Register published on April 11, 2000 (65 FR 19477-78), or you may visit 
<a href="http://dms.dot.gov">http://dms.dot.gov</a>.

Examining the Docket

    You may examine the AD docket on the Internet at <a href="http://dms.dot.gov">http://dms.dot.gov</a>, or in person at the Docket Management Facility office 
between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal 
holidays. The Docket Management Facility office (telephone (800) 647-
5227) is located on the plaza level of the Nassif Building at the DOT 
street address stated in the ADDRESSES section. Comments will be 
available in the AD docket shortly after the Docket Management System 
receives them.

Authority for This Rulemaking

    Title 49 of the United States Code specifies the FAA's authority to 
issue rules on aviation safety. Subtitle I, Section 106, describes the 
authority of the FAA Administrator. Subtitle VII, Aviation Programs, 
describes in more detail the scope of the Agency's authority.
    We are issuing this rulemaking under the authority described in 
subtitle VII, part A, subpart III, section 44701, ``General 
requirements.'' Under that section, Congress charges the FAA with 
promoting safe flight of civil aircraft in air commerce by prescribing 
regulations for practices, methods, and procedures the Administrator 
finds necessary for safety in air commerce. This regulation is within 
the scope of that authority because it addresses an unsafe condition 
that is likely to exist or develop on products identified in this 
rulemaking action.

Regulatory Findings

    We have determined that this AD will not have federalism 
implications under Executive Order 13132. This AD will not have a 
substantial direct effect on the States, on the relationship between 
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power 
and responsibilities among the various levels of government.
    For the reasons discussed above, I certify that the regulation:
    1. Is not a ``significant regulatory action'' under Executive Order 
12866;
    2. Is not a ``significant rule'' under the DOT Regulatory Policies 
and Procedures (44 FR 11034, February 26, 1979); and
    3. Will not have a significant economic impact, positive or 
negative, on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria 
of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.
    We prepared a regulatory evaluation of the estimated costs to 
comply with this AD and placed it in the AD docket. See the ADDRESSES 
section for a location to examine the regulatory evaluation.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 39

    Air transportation, Aircraft, Aviation safety, Incorporation by 
reference, Safety.

Adoption of the Amendment

0
Accordingly, under the authority delegated to me by the Administrator, 
the FAA amends 14 CFR part 39 as follows:

PART 39--AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES

0
1. The authority citation for part 39 continues to read as follows:

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40113, 44701.


Sec.  39.13  [Amended]

0
2. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) amends Sec.  39.13 by 
adding the following new airworthiness directive (AD):

2005-17-13 Short Brothers PLC: Amendment 39-14234. Docket No. FAA-
2005-22168; Directorate Identifier 2005-NM-146-AD.

Effective Date

    (a) This AD becomes effective September 12, 2005.

Affected ADs

    (b) None.

Applicability

    (c) This AD applies to all Shorts Model SD3-60 airplanes, 
certificated in any category.

Unsafe Condition

    (d) This AD results from events in which fatigue cracking was 
found on the rudder horn spar. The FAA is issuing this AD to detect 
and correct cracking and corrosion of the rudder horn spar, which 
could lead to detachment of the mass balance weight of the rudder. 
The detachment of the mass balance weight could jam or restrict the 
movement of the rudder, which could result in reduced 
controllability of the airplane. Loss of a mass balance weight could 
also damage other parts of the airplane, which could result in 
reduced controllability of the airplane, or could result in an 
injury to a person or damage to property on the ground.

Compliance

    (e) You are responsible for having the actions required by this 
AD performed within the compliance times specified, unless the 
actions have already been done.

Service Bulletin

    (f) The term ``service bulletin,'' as used in this AD, means the 
Accomplishment Instructions of Shorts Alert Service Bulletin SD360-
55-A22, Revision 1, dated August 4, 2005.

Inspections

    (g) Within 5 flight cycles after the effective date of this AD, 
do a general visual inspection of the rudder for damage and of the 
balance weight attachment for discrepancies in accordance with Part 
A of the service bulletin.

    Note 1: For the purposes of this AD, a general visual inspection 
is: ``A visual

[[Page 50163]]

examination of an interior or exterior area, installation, or 
assembly to detect obvious damage, failure, or irregularity. This 
level of inspection is made from within touching distance unless 
otherwise specified. A mirror may be necessary to ensure visual 
access to all surfaces in the inspection area. This level of 
inspection is made under normally available lighting conditions such 
as daylight, hangar lighting, flashlight, or droplight and may 
require removal or opening of access panels or doors. Stands, 
ladders, or platforms may be required to gain proximity to the area 
being checked.''

    (1) If no damage and no discrepancy is found, no further action 
is necessary for this paragraph.
    (2) If any damage or discrepancy is found, before further 
flight, do a detailed inspection of the rudder horn spar and a 
borescope inspection of the cleats for cracking and corrosion in 
accordance with Part B of the service bulletin.

    Note 2: For the purposes of this AD, a detailed inspection is: 
``An intensive examination of a specific item, installation, or 
assembly to detect damage, failure, or irregularity. Available 
lighting is normally supplemented with a direct source of good 
lighting at an intensity deemed appropriate. Inspection aids such as 
mirror, magnifying lenses, etc., may be necessary. Surface cleaning 
and elaborate procedures may be required.''

    (h) At the applicable time specified in paragraph (h)(1) or 
(h)(2) of this AD, do a detailed inspection of the rudder horn spar 
and a borescope inspection of the cleats for cracking and corrosion 
in accordance with Part B of the service bulletin, unless the 
inspections have already been done as required by paragraph (g)(2) 
of this AD.
    (1) For airplanes on which a heavy landing has occurred before 
the effective date of this AD, do the inspections within 20 flight 
cycles or 7 days after the effective date of this AD, whichever 
occurs first.
    (2) For airplanes on which a heavy landing has not occurred 
before the effective date of this AD, do the inspections at the 
earlier of the times specified in paragraphs (h)(2)(i), (h)(2)(ii), 
and (h)(2)(iii) of this AD.
    (i) For airplanes on which a heavy landing occurs after the 
effective date of this AD, do the inspections within 20 flight 
cycles or 7 days after the heavy landing occurred, whichever occurs 
first.
    (ii) For airplanes that have accumulated 28,800 or more total 
flight hours, do the inspections within 20 flight cycles or 7 days 
after the effective date of this AD, whichever occurs first.
    (iii) At the applicable time specified in Table 1 of this AD.

        Table 1.--Certain Compliance Times for Part B Inspections
------------------------------------------------------------------------
          For airplanes that--                 Do the inspections--
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Have accumulated 25,000 or less total    Within 80 flight cycles or 28
 flight cycles.                           days after the effective date
                                          of this AD, whichever occurs
                                          first.
Have accumulated more than 25,000 total  Within 40 flight cycles or 14
 flight cycles but less than 50,000       days after the effective date
 total flight cycles.                     of this AD, whichever occurs
                                          first.
Have accumulated 50,000 or more total    Within 20 flight cycles or 7
 flight cycles.                           days after the effective date
                                          of this AD, whichever occurs
                                          first.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Corrective Actions

    (i) If, during any inspection required by paragraph (g)(2) or 
(h) of this AD, no crack is found and any corrosion found is within 
the limits specified in the service bulletin, no further action is 
required by this paragraph.
    (j) If any crack is found during any inspection required by 
paragraph (g)(2) or (h) of this AD, do the corrective action 
specified in paragraph (j)(1), (j)(2), or (j)(3) of this AD, as 
applicable, except as required by paragraph (k) of this AD.
    (1) If any crack is found on the rudder horn spar and there is 
no crack on any of the cleats, do the actions specified in paragraph 
(j)(1)(i) or (j)(1)(ii) of this AD.
    (i) Before further flight, replace the rudder horn spar with a 
new rudder horn spar and replace the cleats, part numbers (P/N) SD3-
33-6404XA and -6405XA, with new cleats, in accordance with Part C of 
the service bulletin.
    (ii) Before further flight, do the temporary repair in 
accordance with Short Brothers Repair Drawing SD3-03-6825XB, dated 
July 2005, and within 300 flight cycles, replace the rudder horn 
spar with a new rudder horn spar, in accordance with Part C of the 
service bulletin.
    (2) If any crack is found on the rudder horn spar and any crack 
is found on any cleat, do the actions specified in paragraph 
(j)(2)(i) or (j)(2)(ii) of this AD.
    (i) Before further flight, replace the rudder horn spar with a 
new rudder horn spar and replace all three cleats with new cleats, 
in accordance with Part C of the service bulletin.
    (ii) Before further flight, do the temporary repair in 
accordance with Short Brothers Repair Drawing SD3-03-6825XB, dated 
July 2005, and within 300 flight cycles, replace the rudder horn 
spar with a new rudder horn spar, in accordance with Part C of the 
service bulletin.
    (3) If any crack is found on any of the cleats and no cracks are 
found on the rudder horn spar, before further flight, replace the 
cleats with new cleats in accordance with Part C of the service 
bulletin or in accordance with Short Brothers Repair Drawing SD3-03-
6825XB, dated July 2005.
    (k) If, during any inspection required by paragraph (g)(2) or 
(h) of this AD, any corrosion is found that is outside the limits 
specified in the service bulletin, before further flight, replace 
the corroded part with a new part, in accordance with Part C of the 
service bulletin.

Actions Accomplished in Accordance With Previous Issue of Service 
Information

    (l) Actions accomplished before the effective date of this AD in 
accordance with Shorts Alert Service Bulletin SD360-55-A22, dated 
July 6, 2005; and Short Brothers Repair Drawing SD3-03-6825XA, dated 
July 2005; are considered acceptable for compliance with the 
corresponding actions specified in this AD.

Alternative Methods of Compliance (AMOCs)

    (m) The Manager, International Branch, ANM-116, FAA, Transport 
Airplane Directorate, has the authority to approve AMOCs for this 
AD, if requested in accordance with the procedures found in 14 CFR 
39.19.

Related Information

    (n) British airworthiness directive G-2005-0021, dated July 6, 
2005, also addresses the subject of this AD.

Material Incorporated by Reference

    (o) You must use Shorts Alert Service Bulletin SD360-55-A22, 
Revision 1, dated August 4, 2005; and Short Brothers Repair Drawing 
SD3-03-6825XB, dated July 2005; as applicable, to perform the 
actions that are required by this AD, unless the AD specifies 
otherwise. The Director of the Federal Register approved the 
incorporation by reference of this document in accordance with 5 
U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. Contact Short Brothers, 
Airworthiness & Engineering Quality, PO Box 241, Airport Road, 
Belfast BT3 9DZ, Northern Ireland, for a copy of this service 
information. You may review copies at the Docket Management 
Facility, U.S. Department of Transportation, 400 Seventh Street, 
SW., Room PL-401, Nassif Building, Washington, DC; on the Internet 
at <a href="http://dms.dot.gov">http://dms.dot.gov</a>; or at the National Archives and Records 
Administration (NARA).
    For information on the availability of this material at the 
NARA, call (202) 741-6030, or go to <a href="http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html">http://www.archives.gov/federal_register/code_of_federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html</a>.



[[Page 50164]]


    Issued in Renton, Washington, on August 12, 2005.
Ali Bahrami,
Manager, Transport Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification 
Service.
[FR Doc. 05-16750 Filed 8-25-05; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4910-13-P


</pre></body>
</html>